earth 4.5 billion years ago
the pale blue dot we know today was
anything but suitable for life
glowing red and fiery hot volcanoes
erupt over the entire molten surface
the average temperature is well over
3000 degrees fahrenheit
much hotter than even lava the planet
just born was constantly under a barrage
of meteor impacts
in fact a mars-sized object would soon
crash into young earth
and form the moon
you couldn't live there and breathing is
certainly out of the question
those continuous volcanic eruptions
released toxic
gases into the sky our earth had almost
no atmosphere
but then life found a way
chemical reactions from those same
volcanic eruptions
would help create an atmosphere the
planet cools and hardens
water appears oceans form they fill with
microorganisms that release
a rush of oxygen into the air the
atmosphere
becomes breathable complex life appears
and evolves
and the rest as they say is history
now imagine that atmosphere the very
thing we breathe
our warm blanket the planet's protective
bubble
was gone in the blink of an eye
but not for long just five quick seconds
surely we can handle it right
time slows down and
one second in everything immediately
becomes silent
just imagine you're screaming or saying
something but no one can hear your voice
just like in outer space there's no
atmosphere for sound waves to travel
through
you can now only feel vibrations in the
ground
right now life on earth is like being in
a vacuum
the planet has also lost the shield that
protects us from solar energy
the sun's rays are too strong and toxic
to handle
these rays are usually filtered when
they pass through the atmosphere
the heat gets distributed throughout the
planet evenly
but at this moment the most unlucky are
those sunbathing on the beach
but most people don't feel it yet in the
first second
they can only feel the temperature
increasing
many plants aren't as lucky as humans
they are less protected
and get scorched in this brief second
but the worst thing
is that oxygen stops being created in
nature
grass trees plants flowers all of them
absorb carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
using the sun's energy they convert this
gas into oxygen
you probably remember learning about
this in school it's photosynthesis
but most of our precious oxygen actually
comes from
the ocean well the seaweed and
microorganisms in it
the ocean releases a huge amount of
oxygen that rises into the sky
then the atmosphere distributes it
throughout the planet
now without that natural distributor we
can't get that precious gas
our bodies need humans won't feel it in
the first second
but for many other living beings this
moment can be critical
[Music]
two seconds with no atmosphere people
outside get sunburned beachgoers can't
rely on their umbrella for protection
it'll soon be scorched by the hot rays
in places where the weather is bad now
all the clouds dissipate
because of the high temperature water
evaporates into space
where it's night now a new ice age
begins
the heat has stopped spreading evenly
all over the planet
the rain turns to ice heavy hail starts
most living nocturnal animals are
freezing people out on the streets of
big cities at night
don't freeze in the first couple seconds
cities create their own heat
and it saves residents for now
the climate that was once so varied warm
dry
rainy wet windy it's reduced to only two
options
extremely hot and extremely cold
water begins to boil in lakes rivers
seas and oceans
but not because of the hot temperature
but a pressure drop
the air disappears there's no longer a
boundary between space and the planet
the sun's shining but the sky's losing
its color
blue is replaced by black the earth
becomes like the moon the planet is
bombarded by solar storms
there are flashes of energy that shoot
out in all directions from the sun
without an atmosphere to protect us the
storms disable
all electronics lights go out the
internet stops working
and cell towers are broken
three seconds in nature has taken a real
hit
because of the extreme temperatures but
the worst is yet to come
the atmosphere protects us not only from
the sun's energy
but also from space debris thousands of
satellites have been disabled
and are now falling to earth they start
to rain down
on this planet and with no warning
usually meteors and anything else
falling toward earth get entirely burnt
up in the atmosphere before they even
reach the planet's surface
our world's gravity pulls them in at
breakneck speeds
the air resistance is too much and
friction skyrockets
a flame ignites and you can see falling
stars in the sky
not anymore the nightmarish rain
will take us by surprise if the
atmosphere doesn't come back soon
small coin-sized meteorites will pierce
through houses
cars fields roads everything
larger meteorites the size of a soccer
ball could create a powerful blast
places everywhere will spend billions of
dollars on repairs
it's impossible to be in the sunny parts
of the planet
the temperature is too high the luckiest
ones
whether human or animal are underground
people in the subway don't feel the heat
they're
also protected from the sun's toxic
energy
everyone has trouble breathing not
enough air to fill your lungs
the world is starting to panic four
seconds in
many are starting to feel dizzy some
lose consciousness
the cells of your body stop being
saturated with oxygen
your body responds in a panic and starts
pumping out adrenaline
heart rate increases pupils dilate the
brain tries to find a solution
but fails people start to get even more
nervous
they'll remember this short-term shock
for a lifetime
five seconds with no atmosphere there's
much less oxygen to breathe
algae and plants are burning or freezing
small rivers and lakes have almost dried
up completely
they're down to a quarter of their size
usually the force of gravity pulls birds
down
but they flap their wings push off the
air resistance
and rise up now the airflow is gone
and only gravity remains birds are
falling from the sky
flapping their wings helplessly they are
joined by airplanes
just when it looks like it'll be a true
horror scene
snap and the atmosphere returns
the planet fills with oxygen and heat
birds manage to rise in the sky again
pilots get control of the yoke and save
millions
the black sky returns to blue the sun's
rays
don't burn so much the heat gets
distributed all around
the temperature rises in cold places
people can take a deep breath bodies of
water stop
boiling surviving plants resume the
process of photosynthesis
you hear your own voice and other sounds
again life returns to normal
oh well don't forget the meteorites
hundreds of cosmic rocks and space
debris start to burn up
but it's too late they're too close to
the surface and don't burn up entirely
several meteorites fall into the sea and
form tsunamis
the ones that crash into the ground
wreak havoc
luckily the rain is over as fast as it
began
no one can use their phone yet because
the connection hasn't been restored
after the solar storm
the only question on everyone's mind is
what just happened
the atmosphere's vanishing for a mere
five seconds
showed how much our planet truly needs
it
humanity won't stand a chance if the
atmosphere disappears forever
fortunately we have technologies that
allow us to monitor the state of our
planetary shield
if it disappears we must be prepared for
it
people will build large domes that won't
allow solar storms to pass through
inside we'll create an artificial
atmosphere
that maintains a normal temperature and
pressure it filters the sun's rays
so plants can release oxygen outside the
domes
earth will look more like mars you'll
only be able to go out there in a
spacesuit
anybody who couldn't get a place under
the domes will go underground
they'll live deep enough to be protected
from the sun it'll be impossible for
them to use our star for energy
so they'll take it from the earth's core
and no need to worry about a reliable
source of water
there are rivers and lakes underground
but who knows perhaps humanity will have
already found a new habitable planet
so if the atmosphere ever suddenly
disappeared we'd be watching from a
distance